MIMIC-IV_Example/README.md, before:

# MIMIC-IV Example

This is an example of how to extract a MEDS dataset from MIMIC-IV. All scripts in this README are assumed to
be run **not** from this directory but from the root directory of this entire repository (e.g., one directory
up from this one).

**Status**: This is a work in progress. The code is not yet functional. Remaining work includes:

- [x] Implementing the pre-MEDS processing step.
  - [x] Implement the joining of discharge times.
  - [x] Implement the conversion of the DOB to a more usable format.
  - [x] Implement the joining of death times.
- [ ] Testing the pre-MEDS processing step on live MIMIC-IV.
  - [x] Test that it runs at all.
  - [ ] Test that the output is as expected.
- [ ] Check the installation instructions on a fresh client.
- [ ] Testing the `configs/event_configs.yaml` configuration on MIMIC-IV
- [ ] Testing the steps of the MEDS extraction ETL on MIMIC-IV (this should be expected to work, but needs
  live testing).

## Step 0: Installation

Download this repository and install the requirements:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:mmcdermott/MEDS_polars_functions.git
cd MEDS_polars_functions
git checkout MIMIC_IV
conda create -n MEDS python=3.12
conda activate MEDS
pip install .[mimic]
```

## Step 1: Download MIMIC-IV

Download the MIMIC-IV dataset from https://physionet.org/content/mimiciv/2.2/ following the instructions on
that page. You will need the raw `.csv.gz` files for this example. We will use `$MIMICIV_RAW_DIR` to denote
the root directory of where the resulting _core data files_ are stored -- e.g., there should be a `hosp` and
`icu` subdirectory of `$MIMICIV_RAW_DIR`.

## Step 2: Get the data ready for base MEDS extraction

This is a step in a few parts:

1. Join a few tables by `hadm_id` to get the right timestamps in the right rows for processing. In
   particular, we need to join:
   - TODO
2. Convert the patient's static data to a more parseable form. This entails:
   - Get the patient's DOB in a format that is usable for MEDS, rather than the integral `anchor_year` and
     `anchor_offset` fields.
   - Merge the patient's `dod` with the `deathtime` from the `admissions` table.

After these steps, modified files or symlinks to the original files will be written in a new directory which
will be used as the input to the actual MEDS extraction ETL. We'll use `$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR` to denote this
directory.

To run this step, you can use the following script (assumed to be run **not** from this directory but from the
root directory of this repository):

```bash
./MIMIC_IV/pre_MEDS.py raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_RAW_DIR output_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR
```

## Step 3: Run the MEDS extraction ETL

We will assume you want to output the final MEDS dataset into a directory we'll denote as `$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR`.
Note this is a different directory than the pre-MEDS directory (though, of course, they can both be
subdirectories of the same root directory).

This is a step in 4 parts:

1. Sub-shard the raw files. Run this command as many times simultaneously as you would like to have workers
   performing this sub-sharding step.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/shard_events.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC_IV/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

2. Extract and form the patient splits and sub-shards.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/split_and_shard_patients.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC_IV/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

3. Extract patient sub-shards and convert to MEDS events.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/convert_to_sharded_events.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC_IV/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

4. Merge the MEDS events into a single file per patient sub-shard.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/merge_to_MEDS_cohort.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC_IV/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

## Limitations / TO-DOs:

Currently, some tables are ignored, including:

1. `hosp/emar_detail`
2. `hosp/microbiologyevents`
3. `hosp/services`
4. `icu/datetimeevents`
5. `icu/ingredientevents`

Lots of questions remain about how to appropriately handle timestamps of the data -- e.g., things like HCPCS
events are stored at the level of the _date_, not the _datetime_. How should those be slotted into the
timeline which is otherwise stored at the _datetime_ resolution?

Other questions:

1. How to handle merging the deathtimes between the hosp table and the patients table?
2. How to handle the dob nonsense MIMIC has?

## Future Work

### Pre-MEDS Processing

If you wanted, some other processing could also be done here, such as:

1. Converting the patient's dynamically recorded race into a static, most commonly recorded race field.

Commit message:

Up to the merging step working fully for the MIMIC example

MIMIC-IV_Example/README.md, after:

# MIMIC-IV Example

This is an example of how to extract a MEDS dataset from MIMIC-IV. All scripts in this README are assumed to
be run **not** from this directory but from the root directory of this entire repository (e.g., one directory
up from this one).

**Status**: This is a work in progress. The code is not yet functional. Remaining work includes:

- [x] Implementing the pre-MEDS processing step.
  - [x] Implement the joining of discharge times.
  - [x] Implement the conversion of the DOB to a more usable format.
  - [x] Implement the joining of death times.
- [ ] Testing the pre-MEDS processing step on live MIMIC-IV.
  - [x] Test that it runs at all.
  - [ ] Test that the output is as expected.
- [ ] Check the installation instructions on a fresh client.
- [x] Testing the `configs/event_configs.yaml` configuration on MIMIC-IV
- [ ] Testing the steps of the MEDS extraction ETL on MIMIC-IV (this should be expected to work, but needs
  live testing).
  - [x] Sub-sharding
  - [x] Patient split gathering
  - [x] Event extraction
  - [ ] Merging

## Step 0: Installation

Download this repository and install the requirements:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:mmcdermott/MEDS_polars_functions.git
cd MEDS_polars_functions
git checkout MIMIC_IV
conda create -n MEDS python=3.12
conda activate MEDS
pip install .[mimic]
```

## Step 1: Download MIMIC-IV

Download the MIMIC-IV dataset from https://physionet.org/content/mimiciv/2.2/ following the instructions on
that page. You will need the raw `.csv.gz` files for this example. We will use `$MIMICIV_RAW_DIR` to denote
the root directory of where the resulting _core data files_ are stored -- e.g., there should be a `hosp` and
`icu` subdirectory of `$MIMICIV_RAW_DIR`.

## Step 2: Get the data ready for base MEDS extraction

This is a step in a few parts:

1. Join a few tables by `hadm_id` to get the right timestamps in the right rows for processing. In
   particular, we need to join:
   - TODO
2. Convert the patient's static data to a more parseable form. This entails:
   - Get the patient's DOB in a format that is usable for MEDS, rather than the integral `anchor_year` and
     `anchor_offset` fields.
   - Merge the patient's `dod` with the `deathtime` from the `admissions` table.

After these steps, modified files or symlinks to the original files will be written in a new directory which
will be used as the input to the actual MEDS extraction ETL. We'll use `$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR` to denote this
directory.

To run this step, you can use the following script (assumed to be run **not** from this directory but from the
root directory of this repository):

```bash
./MIMIC-IV_Example/pre_MEDS.py raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_RAW_DIR output_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR
```

In practice, on a machine with 150 GB of RAM and 10 cores, this step takes less than 5 minutes in total.

## Step 3: Run the MEDS extraction ETL

We will assume you want to output the final MEDS dataset into a directory we'll denote as `$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR`.
Note this is a different directory than the pre-MEDS directory (though, of course, they can both be
subdirectories of the same root directory).

This is a step in 4 parts:

1. Sub-shard the raw files. Run this command as many times simultaneously as you would like to have workers
   performing this sub-sharding step.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/shard_events.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC-IV_Example/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

In practice, on a machine with 150 GB of RAM and 10 cores, this step takes approximately 20 minutes in total.

2. Extract and form the patient splits and sub-shards.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/split_and_shard_patients.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC-IV_Example/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

In practice, on a machine with 150 GB of RAM and 10 cores, this step takes less than 5 minutes in total.

3. Extract patient sub-shards and convert to MEDS events.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/convert_to_sharded_events.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC-IV_Example/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

In practice, serially, this also takes around 20 minutes or more. However, it can be trivially parallelized to
cut the time down by a factor of the number of workers processing the data by simply running the command
multiple times (though this will, of course, consume more resources). If your filesystem is distributed, these
commands can also be launched as separate slurm jobs, for example. For MIMIC-IV, this level of parallelization
and performance is not necessary; however, for larger datasets, it can be.

4. Merge the MEDS events into a single file per patient sub-shard.

```bash
./scripts/extraction/merge_to_MEDS_cohort.py \
    raw_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_PREMEDS_DIR \
    MEDS_cohort_dir=$MIMICIV_MEDS_DIR \
    event_conversion_config_fp=./MIMIC-IV_Example/configs/event_configs.yaml
```

## Limitations / TO-DOs:

Currently, some tables are ignored, including:

1. `hosp/emar_detail`
2. `hosp/microbiologyevents`
3. `hosp/services`
4. `icu/datetimeevents`
5. `icu/ingredientevents`

Lots of questions remain about how to appropriately handle timestamps of the data -- e.g., things like HCPCS
events are stored at the level of the _date_, not the _datetime_. How should those be slotted into the
timeline which is otherwise stored at the _datetime_ resolution?

Other questions:

1. How to handle merging the deathtimes between the hosp table and the patients table?
2. How to handle the dob nonsense MIMIC has?

## Future Work

### Pre-MEDS Processing

If you wanted, some other processing could also be done here, such as:

1. Converting the patient's dynamically recorded race into a static, most commonly recorded race field.
